All right.
So let's do a couple of problems for finding the entrails of increase and decrease of different functions.
Let's start with this one find the intervals of increase and decrease for f of x equals x cubed over
three plus five x squared over two plus 6 x plus three.
So Elettra pause a video and give it a shot.
All right.
So let's see how you did.
So remember that to find the intervals of increase and decrease we're going to use the first derivative.
Step Number 1 is finding the derivative of f of x so prime of X let's see what that is.
So as you can see we have a sum of different functions.
So what we're going to do is we're going to use some rule and we are going to take the derivative of
each individual term.
So each function and we're going to add them together.
So let's start over here.
So for this first function we have a constant multiple That's one third right because it's dividing
by three.
We bring down our dictators so that's three X and less powerful leader becomes a two then plus.
And here we have a nother constant multiple That's five over two five over two.
And then we bring down a dictator times to X and less powerful leader becomes a one on top.
So we don't market plus 6 x so constant multiple is six.
And remember the derivative of X is just one.
We've done this a couple of times and I repeat it because again it's a source of confusion for a lot
of people.
The dictator here for the axe is one we bring it down.
So that is a 1 and then X
and since the exponent was a 1 when we substitute by a less powerful leader it becomes a zero x to zero
which again is one number this is one.
All right.
So let's go ahead and simplify.
So check it out.
We have 8 3 on top and 3 on the bottom.
So these two cancel out.
We have a two on top and a two on the bottom.
And remember this is six times one times one.
So this is just six.
So we end up having X squared plus 5 x plus 6.
This is our derivative.
All right.
So for the first step we just found our derivative.
Let's go to our second step.
We need to find the critical numbers for this derivative.
So the numbers that make it equal to zero or the numbers that make it undefined.
And again this derivatives does not have a bottom so it cannot be defined for that reason.
We're only going to find the numbers that make it equal to zero.
By the way in the next example we'll do one where he does have a bottom.
So we'll have that one as well.
All right.
But for now let's just set it equal to zero squared plus 5 x plus 6 equal to zero.
And how do we know which numbers make this equal to zero.
So remember when you have something like this you always try to factor it one way or another and in
this case we are factoring trinomial.
So we have to factor trinomial.
And how do we do that.
Well which is bring down x here and we bring down x here.
So the sign of this one is a sign of this one that's positive and the sign of this one is the multiplication
of these two positive terms positive is also positive.
And remember that we need to get two numbers that multiplied give us six and added Give us five.
Obviously that is three and two right.
Three times two equals six ense three plus two equals five.
If you've never seen this type of factoring before there will be a youtube link to factoring videos
so you can check those out.
Remember this is just algebra.
All right.
So we factored our function.
And remember this is equal to zero.
So what is this whole thing equal to zero.
Well you're multiplying two things right.
You're multiplying X plus three and you're multiplying X plus two.
So remember that anything times zero equals zero.
So if either this one is zero or this one is zero then the whole thing will be zero.
So we need to figure out when this one is zero.
And when this one is zero.
And remember the way we do that is I'll put it over here.
We said the first term equals zero.
So X plus three equals zero and we solve for x.
So we have to move this three to the other side so we can have x by itself.
So we do minus three and minus three and both sides.
Cancels out and X equals negative 3.
All right.
So this guy is 0 when X equals negative 3.
Let's see what this guy is all about.
So now let's set this one to zero x plus two equals zero.
And again we subtract two from both sides to leave the x by itself.
Two minus two cancels out and we have X equals negative two.
All right so we have a zero at negative 3 and that makes sense because if you plug in negative three
here it's negative three plus three that give you 0 0 multiplied by whatever this gives you equal zero.
And the same way.
This is zero when X equals negative to negative two plus two equals zero.
So zero times whatever you get here equals zero.
So our critical numbers are negative 3 and negative 2.
All right.
And as a last type we'll go ahead and we'll classify with our number line.
So remember that to do this we draw our number line over here.
And we put the negative 3.
So remember it is from smallest to largest.
So as you go from left to right you are increasing.
So the smaller number in this case negative 3 has to be on the left and the bigger number needs to be
on the right which is negative to remember that negative 2 is greater than negative 3 because the more
negative you get the smaller quote unquote the number is right.
So if we had had for example 5 and 10 we would put five here and then 10 here because again as you move
from left to right you're increasing and now what we need to do is we need to test values to the left
of the negative three between the negative 3 and the negative 2.
So over here and to the right of this negative to.
So let's pick easy numbers.
So our test value for the left of negative 3 let's make it negative 10.
And again if you picked different numbers it doesn't matter as long as you get the same answer.
So for example if instead of negative 10 you picked negative five it'll give you the same answer.
If you do it correctly but I always like to pick easy numbers because that makes it a lot easier.
All right and between negative 3 and negative 2 we'll go ahead and pick negative 2.5.
Unfortunately it has to be a decimal because there are no whole numbers between negative 3 and negative
2.
And finally to the right of two I'm going to pick 0 0 is usually a good choice because it cancels out
a lot of things.
All right so we have three test values that we need to test.
Let's go ahead and take these test values and plug them into the derivative.
So first let's go ahead and plug in negative 10
into the first derivative.
Remember you do not plug this into the original because that would just give you a y value.
And the graph of this function what we're looking for is intervals of increase and decrease.
And that's given by the sign of the first derivative.
So plug it in negative 10.
You could either plug it in into this one or you could plug it in into the factored form.
I think in this case the fact reform is probably easier but if you did it with this one here that's
ok too.
It doesn't matter.
So let's go ahead and try this.
So we have negative 10 plus 3 that's negative 7 times negative 10 plus 2 that's negative 8
so negative times a negative remember is a positive and seven times 8 is 56.
There you go.
So Prime of negative 10 is 56.
It's positive.
That means that to the left of this negative three you have a positive sign for the derivative.
All right let's go ahead and plug in our second test value negative 2.5
by the way.
It's always a good idea to circle the test values because if not you might plug in you know this negative
3 or negative 2.
Those are going to give you zero.
Right.
Because we got them by finding the numbers that make the first derivative equal to zero.
So just so you know exactly what to plug in.
Always a good idea to circle these test values.
So let's plug in negative 2.5.
So we have
negative 2.5 plus three point five and again you're welcome to do this in a calculator if you need to.
Negative 2.5 plus 2 is negative.
Point five
positive times a negative is a negative.
So that's a negative.
And point five times point five is point twenty five.
So that's negative.
Point twenty five it's barely negative but it's negative.
So between negative three and negative to the sign of the derivative is negative right.
And let's plug in our last number should be the easiest one is zero.
That's her third test value.
So let's go ahead and plug it in here.
Zero plus three is just three and zero plus two is just two.
So three times two is six.
That is a positive number because three and two are both positive and so to the right of negative to
zero is the sign of the derivative is positive.
Now we know what the sign of the derivative is for each of the intervals.
Let's go ahead and get our answer.
So to the left of negative 3 The derivative is positive.
That means that is increasing to the left of negative 3.
So we have that from negative infinity up to negative 3.
It is increasing.
All right so this original function between negative infinity and negative 3 the function is increasing
how ever when we get to negative 3 from negative 3 to negative to the sign of the derivative is negative.
That means that it's decreasing.
So from negative 3 to negative to it is decreasing.
All right.
So positive means increasing and negative means decreasing.
And we have one more interval which is to the right of this negative to and to the right of the negative
to it's positive.
So starting at the negative 2 and going up to positive infinity this is increasing.
Right.
So these are the intervals of increase and decrease.
And there we have our answer at this point.
We are done
so to quickly summarize to find the intervals of increase and decrease we've got the derivative of the
function then we set it equal to zero and we've factored to be able to find the numbers that make it
equal to zero.
They turn out to be negative 3 and negative 2.
So we had to test values to the left and right of each to the right of negative 3 between negative 3
and negative 2 and to the right of negative 2 we got these test values.
We plug them into the derivative and we got the science of the answer.
So positive negative positive so positive negative positive and based on this number line we were able
to get our intervals of increase and decrease when the derivative is positive.
Then the original function is increasing.
And when the derivative is negative then the original function is decreasing.